Exercises

1) What data types do each of these values represent?

  1. "A Clockwork Orange" == String data type
  2. 42 == Integer data tyoe
  3. 09/02/1945 == Date data type
  4. 98.7 == Float data type
  5. $15.99 == Float data type

2) Explain when a database would be used. Explain when a text file would be used.

    - A database would be used when you want to allow users to make changes to data 
      and you would like their data to be saved even when the program ends. Also,
      you will need a database if the data will be accessed by two or more applications
      at a time so they can simultaneously maniplute data.
      A text file would be used when the data would need to be read by humans and if
      only 1 application will be manipulating the data at a time.

3) Describe one difference between SQL and other programming languages.

    - SQL is different from other programming language because it's a declarative 
      language and not a procedural language.  This allows programmers to 'tell' 
      the database what information/data they want and the database will retrieve the
      data on its own.  Programmers do not have to tell the database how to serch for
      the data.

4) In your own words, explain how the pieces of a database system fit together at 
   a high level.

    - Databases are used to allow users to add, delete or update data through an 
      interface. The user can use any of the following data types: strings, integers,
      dates, objects or floats for their data. The database then stores the data in 
      a binary file format which will make it easy to find, change and return desired data. 
      When desired, data can be retrieved from the database using SQL (Structured Query Language).

5) Explain the meaning of table, row, column, and value.

    - A table is a data structure that uses columns and rows to organize data.
      A column is an element of a table data structure that is used to assign meaning 
      to data to be stored in the row cells.
      A row is an element of a table data structure that contains cells that are
      arranged horizontally. Rows are used to fill in data relating to the column.
      A value is data that is entered into a cell of a table data structure.

6) List three data types that can be used in a table.

     Three data types that can be used in a table are: 
     1. Strings
     2. Dates
     3. Integers

7)  
    1. SELECT date, amount
       FROM payments;
        - "I would like to see the date and amount of all the payments."

    2. SELECT amount
       FROM payments
       WHERE amount > 500;
        - "I would like to see the amount of all the payments that were more than 
           500."
       
    3. SELECT *
       FROM payments
       WHERE payee = 'Mega Foods';
       - "I would like to see the date, payee, amount and memo of the payment made to
          the payee equal to Mego Foods."

8)  
    1. The email and sign-up date for the user named DeAndre Data:
       
         SELECT email, signup 
         FROM  users
         WHERE name = "DeAndre Data";
        
        OUTPUT:         email             signup
                   datad@comcast.net    2008-01-20

    2. The user ID for the user with email 'aleesia.algorithm@uw.edu':
        
         SELECT userid
         FROM  users
         WHERE email = 'aleesia.algorithm@uw.edu' 

        OUTPUT:     userid
                      1

    3. All the columns for the user ID equal to 4:
       
         SELECT *
         FROM  users
         WHERE userid = 4

        OUTPUT:  userid       name              email            signup
                   4     Brandy Boolean	   bboolean@nasa.gov   1999-10-15
