Exercises

1) List the commands for adding, updating, and deleting data.

     - The command for adding data into a table is INSERT INTO.
       The command for updating data of a table is UPDATE.
       The command for delting data from a table is DELETE FROM.

2) Explain the structure for each type of command.
 
     -  The INSERT INTO command starts with the INSERT INTO key words followed
        by the name of the table to be modified.  Then inside of parentheses, the
        values of the table cloumns are listed. Then the VALUES key word is used followed
        by parentheses containing the data pertaining to each column. 
        
        The DELETE FROM command starts with the key words DELETE FROM. Then the name 
        of the table to be modified is declared.  Then the WHERE keyword is used to 
        identify the row(s) to be deleted.

        The UPDATE command starts with the UPDATE key word. Then the name of the table 
        to be modified is declared.  Then the SET keyword is used followed by the column 
        name.  Then the equal operator is used with the new data to be passed in to the
        table. Then the WHERE keyword is used to identify the row(s) to be updated.


3) What are some of the data types that can be used in tables? Give a real-world 
   example of each type.

     - Text is a data type that can be used in tables.  A real-world example would be
       the name of a user.
       Integers are also a data type that can be used in tables. A real-world example
       would be if a company wanted to track the quantity of an item it has in inventory.
       Date is also a data type that can be used in a table. A real-world example
       would be the birthdate of a user.

4) Decide how to create a new table to hold a list of people invited to a wedding 
   dinner. The table needs to have first and last names, whether they sent in their 
   RSVP, the number of guests they are bringing, and the number of meals (1 for adults 
   and 1/2 for children).

     A) Which data type would you use to store each of the following pieces of information?
          a. First and last name. - TEXT data type.
          b. Whether they sent in their RSVP. - BOOLEAN data type
          c. Number of guests. - INTEGER data type
          d. Number of meals. - NUMERIC data type (with 1 decimal place for half dinners)

     B) Write a command that creates the table to track the wedding dinner.

          CREATE TABLE wedding (
            first text,
            last text,
            rsvp boolean,
            guests integer,
            meals numeric(3, 1)
          );      

     C) Write a command that adds a column to track whether the guest sent a thank you 
        card.

          ALTER TABLE wedding ADD COLUMN thank you card boolean;
     
     D) You have decided to move the data about the meals to another table, so write 
        a command to remove the column storing the number meals from the wedding 
        table.

          ALTER TABLE wedding DROP COLUMN meals; 

     E) The guests will need a place to sit at the reception, so write a command that 
        adds a column for table number.

          ALTER TABLE wedding ADD COLUMN table number integer SET DEFAULT 0;

     F) The wedding is over and we do not need to keep this information, so write a 
        command that deletes the table numbers from the database.

          ALTER TABLE wedding DROP COLUMN table number;

5) Write a command to create a new table to hold the books in a library with the 
   columns ISBN, title, author, genre, publishing date, number of copies, and 
   available copies.

     CREATE TABLE library (
       ISBN  integer,
       title text,
       author text,
       genre text,
       publishing date date,
       number of copies integer,
       available copies integer
     );

      A) Find three books and add their information to the table.
      
          INSERT INTO library (ISBN, title, author, genre, publishing date, number of copies, available copies)
          VALUES
            (0385504209, 'The Da Vinci Code', 'Dan Brown', 'Mystery', 04/2003, 8, 4),  
            (0684801221, 'The Old Man and the Sea', 'Ernest Hemingway', 'Literay Fiction', 1952, 12, 9),
            (9780735211209, 'Into the Water', 'Paula Hawkins', 'Mystery' 05/02/2017, 5, 3);

      B) Someone has just checked out one of the books. Change the number of available 
         copies to 1 fewer.
           
           UPDATE library SET available copies=2 WHERE title='Into the Water';

      C) Now one of the books has been added to the banned books list. Remove it from 
         the table.

           DELETE FROM library WHERE ISBN=0684801221;


6) Write a command to make a new table to hold spacecrafts. Information should 
   include id, name, year launched, country of origin, a brief description of the 
   mission, orbiting body, if it is currently operating, and its approximate miles 
   from Earth. In addition to the table creation, provide commands that perform the 
   following operations:

       CREATE TABLE spacecrafts (
            id integer,
            name text,
            year launched integer,
            country of origin text,
            mission description text,
            orbiting body text,
            currently operating boolean,
            millions of miles from Earth integer
            );

     A) Add three non-Earth-orbiting satellites to the table.

          INSERT INTO spacecrafts (id, name, year launched, country of origin, mission description, orbiting body, currently operating, miles from Earth)
          VALUES
          (144828, 'StarCraft', 2011, 'USA', 'Find life forms on Saturn.', 'Saturn', true, 750),
          (827472, 'Space Invader', 2009, 'Russia', 'Search surface of Mars for best area to set up base camp.', 'Mars', true, 34),
          (926461, 'Adventurer', 1997, 'Japan', 'Take pictures of Jupiter', 'Jupiter', false, 365);

     B) Remove one of the satellites from the table since it has just crashed into 
        the planet.

          DELETE FROM spacecrafts WHERE id=827472;
     
     C) Edit another satellite because it is no longer operating and change the value 
        to reflect that.

          UPDATE spacecrafts SET currently operating=false WHERE id=144828; 

7) Write a command to create a new table to hold the emails in your inbox. This table
   should include an id, the subject line, the sender, any additional recipients, 
   the body of the email, the timestamp, whether or not you have read the email, and 
   the id of the email chain it's in. Also provide commands that perform the following 
   operations:

       CREATE TABLE inbox (
            id integer,
            subject line text,
            sender text,
            additional recipients text,
            body text,
            timestamp timestamp,
            read boolean,
            chain id integer
       );
    

     A) Add three new emails to the inbox.

          INSERT INTO inbox (id, subject line, sender, additional recipients, body, timestamp, read, chain id)
          VALUES
          TIMESTAMP '2013-03-13 19:06:00'
          (23, 'Today', 'Mike', 'Tony', 'What are you up to today?', TIMESTAMP '2001-08-11 8:00:01', true, 342),
          (882, 'Meeting Tomorrow', 'Larry', 'Joey', 'Don't forget the meeting tomorrow at noon!!', TIMESTAMP '2014-02-12 20:12:23', true, 942),
          (1022, 'Pay Your Bill', 'Comcast', 'None', 'Your bill is overdue. Please pay today.', TIMESTAMP '2019-01-11 05:29:44', false, 77463);

     B) You deleted one of the emails, so write a command to remove the row from the inbox
        table.

        DELETE FROM inbox WHERE id=23;
     
     C) You started reading an email but just heard a crash in another room. Mark the 
        email as unread before investigating the crash, so you can come back and read it 
        later.

          UPDATE inbox SET read=false WHERE id=882;                                                                               

